[Music]
hello everyone
welcome to adventures through the mind
i'm your host as always
james w gesso this podcast explores
topics relevant and related to
psychedelic culture
medicine and research and i'm going to
start this one off with a question
have you ever wondered what 76
high-dose lsd sessions over the course
of 20 years
might teach a person about how to
make sense spiritually of a global
crisis
and perhaps the collapse of civilization
as we know it
well if you wondered about that you're
in luck for this episode
because that's exactly what we're going
to talk about we're talking with
christopher baiche the author of this
book lsd
and the mind of the universe christopher
m
bash is a professor emeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at youngstown state university
where he has taught for 33 years a
fellow at the institute of noetic
sciences
he is also adjunct faculty at the
california institute of integral studies
and on the advisory board
for graf transpersonal training in the
graf foundation
an award-winning teacher and
international speaker he is the author
of
three books and he's been on the show
previously oh i forgot to get the number
of that episode one second
episode 89 mapping consciousness with
high-dose lsd
where we talked about essentially what
this was all about his his 70
excuse me 73 high-dose lsd journeys over
20 years
and what he experienced and what he
learned about the nature
of reality and the nature of the
universe throughout the course of it
now this is sort of a follow-up from
that from that
interview and it was intended to be as
you'll hear in the beginning a
discussion of various different themes
of the book
but pretty quickly it focused on a
particular aspect
of the book which is that while chris
was having experiences of
deep time which is sort of like you can
imagine experiencing
the entire course of the human existence
as a singular moment
or the entire entirety of time and space
as a singular thing for example although
he does a better job explaining it
he had a vision at one point of what he
called the birth of the future human
in it coming out of basically extreme
cataclysm
in some sense or another a long phase of
extreme
strife and grief and suffering and
challenges that pushes humanity into
its next phase of evolution and chris
considers where we're at now to sort of
be the start of that
so what initially was going to be me
just taking quotes out of this
incredible book turned out to be a
discussion
with uh with chris about the crazy
situation we seem to be in as a planet
right now
and what from his perspective is
a is the sort of spiritual meaning of it
or how we might
approach it spiritually um and
yeah so that's what we talk about now
this interview was actually recorded
in september of 2020. i'm not entirely
sure why it took me so long you know
what i'll tell you why it took me so
long to get it out is because i was
in the interview i actually was going
through a difficult time
and at some point it became less of an
interview and more of a young man
pleading to an older man for some sort
of wisdom to make sense of
crisis make sense of the challenges
personally and existentially that i felt
like i was facing in the moment and
still kind of feel like i'm facing
and maybe i was a little embarrassed
about that i don't know but either way
now is the time that it's coming out and
some of you might seem to
see some similarities in some of the
topics to some recent controversies in
the
five meow dmt world but none of this is
a response to that this is
was actually recorded what is it now
april so like more than six more than
six months ago
um so yeah that's for context it's
happening this was recorded september
2020.
um another point of process about it is
that uh chris's
sound is not always super great there's
some banging some knocking in the
background did my best to clean it up
removed a lot of stuff that you won't
hear um but
bear with it a little bit in fact
there's one point where he's saying
something
super meaningful and it is like some
loud thing comes in the background
that's so distracting
at this moment that feels like just such
a like a pinnacle of like the value of
what he's offering
it just like it's just an interesting
sort of like reality dance moment
um but anyway so that's those are those
are the caveats
um and that's uh that's the interview we
got today with christopher beige
before we get into it i want to give a
big thanks to my patrons on
patreon without whom this podcast would
not exist
so thank you the people whose names are
listed on the screen here on youtube
have been giving significantly some of
which for a long time
their names are also in the show notes
to this episode wherever
you're catching it so thank you so much
um
patrons and if you're not yet a patron
please become one by heading to
patreon.comgesso jameswgesso or you can
give a one-time
donation through paypal or
cryptocurrency um listed
uh links to that are listed in the
description of this episode so
thanks so much for helping support the
show financially
and uh not not only just for
me and for you but also when people
donate
uh it allows other people who are
enjoying the show who don't donate
in order to enjoy the show for free
because it's free no matter what
this is sort of like on good faith i'm
producing it for free and if you like it
cost me some money and i'll keep making
it regardless you know or well
as best i can um okay so that's all
that's all for this
intro stay tuned to the end i got a
special announcement um but
here we go but uh here we go
this is my interview my second interview
with christopher baiche here on
adventures through the mind
enjoy uh so chris i i had been
i had been going through
i have been going through like the
extensive amount of notes i have like i
listened to our
first podcast again and i went back
through the notes i took
uh when i was in your workshop in
vancouver
and also was going through the book and
i just
i kept wondering to myself like what
what's the course here i felt like in
our first
in our first interview i had the ability
to
to have listened to your talks and
had paid attention to the way that you
structure your lectures
and then sort of utilize that as le as
the as the sort of like
as the path to walk having a sense of
how you start
what you talk about and where you go and
then sort of use that as a way
and i didn't have that this time and so
and if you're okay with it i thought
what might be interesting because i have
your book here
and as you can see i've had i've had
quite a time with your book
yeah author loves to see it yeah it's
great yeah i moved i moved on to little
tabs because
i was like well you know what as much as
as much as most like
authors are like oh yeah write in it
fold up the pages whatever works i just
kind of
grew out of wanting to just destroy the
paper that holds the book
yeah yeah so i thought maybe it would be
fun if you're open to it that
i would just go into some of the things
that i've felt really moved by or
relevant in your book
read the piece and then be like what is
this and have you sort of like speak to
that would that feel cool for you
sure that's fine that's great and i'll
tell you too that um
now that came out books out
first round of interviews and all that
stuff
kavkovic hit stepping back digesting
people's first reactions i
uh i don't think i sent you a copy of an
article that i just sent to
psymednet and you know in england
basically i'm calling it a postscript to
lsd in the mind of the universe it's uh
of responding to people's first takes
on the book first round of experiences
but in that process
i'm finding that there is a whole
another tier of the implications
of these potentials which
i just feel like i'm beginning to want
to get
into it's like nothing new
and at the same time the sheer
the sheer audacity of the claims
concerning the limits uh and the revised
limits of human experience what we're
capable of
and the import of entering such deep
intimacy
with the consciousness of the universe
it's all just sinking into me at a new
level
so that's a cons it's a conversation
i'm really glad to be doing this second
bite of the apple
something different and there's been a
whole lot of first interviews
and i'm glad to see i'm glad to spend
this time with you and
happy to see where we go cool is that is
that something that you feel
because i'm i'm i'm ready and willing to
adapt is that something that you feel
like you'd like to get into
or is it something where if i pick a
section of the book
it can work as a reference point even
for your sort of like the second tier of
your considerations on the impact of the
book
yeah uh let's do it i trust it'll if
it'll come up where it's relevant
in our discussion uh yeah because
it it floats in the back and it's not
like a specific set of themes
it's it's uh
[Applause]
portly partly it's the enormity of the
vision of history
that's involved and it seems like we're
getting into that episode
a period of history faster than i
thought we were going to be getting into
it
and partly it's simply the sheer scale
of the of the undertaking
but it'll come up when as it comes up
it'll flow as it comes up in our
discussion i trust our discussion
well i mean i think it's right here
right now because this is something that
definitely came up for me as i was
reading
near the end of the book because i i
read it i read it this year i read it
during the 2020 pandemic lockdown you
know it was one of the things i
i was i was immersing myself in while i
was
locked away from the world really no
different than i would have been
otherwise except i didn't have social
events to unfurl
into you know at the end of the day and
on the weekends um
oh not to mention all the existential uh
you know like gravity of it all um
but one of the things is you you get to
a point where you you you're talking
about
this sort of like
this i'm not using your terminology here
or maybe i
accidentally am because i forget what it
was but something about like basically
being this rock tumbler
and that this this future human is going
to emerge out of like
deep strife and struggle and pain
and you know these sort of like
this look at at what will become history
as being an event not too similar
something anagolous
anagolous to the cleansing process of
your psychedelic explorations and
strictly so
yeah and so as i was reading it i was
like i kind of feel like
i kind of feel like on one level i'd be
i might be foolish to think we're
already there despite how bad this
is this is nothing you know this is
ultimately just a virus
right and it's just yeah yeah but but
how do you feel about it
i think of it as an overture it contains
some of the key elements of the symphony
that's coming but only in short
abbreviated forms
it's mobilizing us i think what's coming
is going to be much much worse
but if we learn this has sort of
disoriented us a lot and
it's given us a lot of lessons and
hopefully it's giving us
learnings teachings that will help us in
what comes next
uh but you're right this is just
this is just act one it's just an
overture
yeah a stress test is how i heard it
described early on like this
this is a stress of course it's it has
evolved well and beyond just the
pandemic we have
sort of the total dissolution of what
was once thought of as
of objective reality due to the impact
of
multiple what i i have heard described
as
multi-level narrative warfare and the
destruction
of deep considerate or coherent thinking
and dialogue because of social media
and how the news and then the you know
all the
populism and nationalism and also the
yeah the big
pushback against these types of things
as well especially black lives matter
and stuff like that
um yeah but and at the same time it's
like
this really is not nearly as bad as it
could get
or maybe will get yeah yeah i think so i
think you're right
in fact let me grab a book to bring it
up here to beale because
i'm probably going to want to mention it
somewhere in this process and i'd like
to have the cover to show you
sure this is a book i went to get
dwayne elgin's last book
uh choosing earth it's
a lifetime literally a lifetime of
research
going into it and he gives he has a
uh he's a social activist in a very
detailed
decade by decade what he thinks is
coming and he
he really marshals he's been tracking
the large
scientific data global health of the
planet
people for a long time and he has a
he really lays out a time of
increasingly tight
collapse over the next several decades
he really thinks
by 2050 we're going to be
more than halfway into the great
collapse
so i just want to bring it in to mention
it when it comes up
yeah that's um
so then what's coming up for me right
now is it is this question of
of and i've heard listeners you know if
yes if they're hearing and getting your
work for the first if this is their
first
encounter with you this might be all of
a sudden like whoa how are we already in
the deep end here
um but this is very much a continuing
conversation between you and i and then
also
with your work yeah um yeah i i notice
what comes up for me is this
this this you know the immediate like
what do we do what do i do kind of like
that sort of
quick to problem solve fix action
now forward rather than how did we get
here what does this mean
how did we how do we come to understand
what's happening prior to even
coming to understand what an
action-based solution is and i'm curious
for you
where where you see that process of
coming to understand
where we are is um yeah
something akin to you know you're
mentioning about
you know something about a lot of
lessons here what do you think these
lessons are
what are we learning and in fact perhaps
what does it appear from where you're
sitting
that we're not learning out of all of
this yeah
well i don't i have to be careful i'm
not on the front line
i i have only second hand information
from the news accounts as i watch
people react and respond uh
we're learning a number of things one of
them is we're learning the fragility
of our of our system uh we're learning
our interconnectedness
how systems that have functioned quietly
side by side
seemingly independently they're not
independent at all they're quite
interdependent we're learning a lot
about supply chains and
and how our where our resources come
from
and um we're learning that
that people who have very modest jobs
from
some socioeconomic viewpoint have very
important jobs when it comes to
maintaining the health and well-being of
our of our collective
so i think we're learning
interdependence we're learning
um our entire
life can be turned upside down much
faster than we thought it could
we we don't have as nearly as much
stability
as we think we do um
i i think we're learning something about
um
the limits of patriarchal ego and i
think trump is the
embodiment i hope of the last gasp of
the
patriarchal monarchy we're learning how
ugly ego is just how really really
ugly it is uh and we're learning a lot
about
um where to go and where not to go when
we come into crisis
this polarization is taking place the
resort of violence
uh how quickly we move to violence and
it's like we take
almost any issue no matter how trivial
like
mass and turn it into an issue which
leads to people
killing each other i mean it's just
the mirror what we're seeing in the
mirror is
not very complimentary it's pretty ugly
the way i sort of see the larger
landscape of course is that
[Applause]
um
in so many ways it's ego that built our
culture
uh and by that i mean simply it's a
human being
at a level of spiritual development
which identifies with their body has a
certain level of self-awareness but
that self-awareness stops pretty close
to the edge of their fingers and toes
and they still are looking out
rationally looking out for their
well-being
and the well-being of a small number of
people near them and around them who
basically look like them or related to
them in some fundamental way
ego is a magnificent thing a beautiful
thing an important thing
but a world built by a species that's
operating out of egoic
awareness is
a divided world it's a world of haves
and have-nots
and we can't get more extreme
in the presentation to ourselves than
the halves and half knots
in duane's book i came across the
statistic that
five people own as much of the world's
resources
as half of the world five people
have half of the world's resources you
just can't have that big a disparity
of halves and half knots and it's just
being
this illness is just blasting this into
our faces
who's suffering the most and who's
suffering the most and the poor
and persons of color so
a lot going on uh but this is just
warm up this is just the the first wave
i think
i think maybe the first wave might have
been actually the credit crisis of 2008
because that taught us some things and
it also sucked a lot of
liquidity out of the system we have much
less
much fewer financial resources to fight
with than we did before
and now this is getting deeper you know
national debt increases
but certainly we are if not in the first
round we certainly are in a significant
second round
i mean for for listeners again who
don't know like it wouldn't appear as
though this conversation is couched in
your 20-year journey your your your
40-year journey
as a as a philosophy professor and a
20-year journey
with high-dose lsd sessions
um and the book that we're we were
referring to earlier
is your book on those journeys as well
as a number of other books
and i'm just curious because what i'm
seeing in the world um
which is mostly the world that is
mediated
by a screen at this point um
is not the kind of place i really want
to be
uh both in i don't
both in the sense of i don't want to be
where it appears we're going
i don't want to be a part of a system
that does the things that it does you
know like the
i don't i don't like the fact that i'm a
part of this
disgusting distorted thing
and also what i see from the behavior of
the people around me and there's a lot
to be said about how
social media algorithms and
and isolation and mental health crises
acknowledged or not are contributing to
this but i see a lot of toxic behavior
a lot of toxic people a lot of toxic
discussion sort of like draped in this
sort of like
uh this sort of self-confident
self-righteous almost
machiavellian style like moralism
of like the good versus the evil and the
good is me and anyone that disagrees is
like
the violent devil i must cast out and
and whatever else
and i don't feel good about what i'm
seeing about the world and
it makes me want to just like hide away
inside now
yeah that said coaching this
in psychedelics and looking at it as
as a large psychedelic amusing air
quotes for listeners
process that's happening collectively on
a global scale not just with humanity
but we're
although we don't know what the feelings
and the thoughts or perspectives are
the birds and the salamanders and the
and the whales and and whatever
you know they're going through that with
us so it's like a planet it's like a
planetary
experience right yeah that when i see
these parts of myself
in a psychedelic session it's
no more comfortable by any means it's
equally as ugly yeah you know and i want
to hide away from that too
and get one of the things you talk about
in your book
is that you we need to learn
as a part of the psychedelic journey we
need to learn how to not turn away
from our pain or from that pain i mean
like the pain of
touching a hot fire we turn away from
but this kind of pain
that we learn to turn towards it and i'm
wondering if you could just
that's not a clear question but can you
just comment yeah yeah yeah
you know the starting point of serious
psychedelic work
is taking complete responsibility for
one's own shadow
and uh and you just go into a room
close the door lock the door you're
inside by yourself
nothing there but you in your mind and
you go
into the parts of your being which are
at least initially the most daunting the
most intimidating the most frightening
the ugliest ones we like to acknowledge
the least
uh you know and but the commitment
is there to take that on to enter into
it
uh when we see that
ugliness being manifested in the world
around us by people who are not
have not yet taken responsibility for
themselves and they they
are still in this exterior mode
where the the shadow was really outside
of them the evil and the darkness and
the really ugly things were outside of
them
um that's a very different world isn't
it
and i think this whole process of
breaking down this breaking down process
that we're going into
is basically going to be breaking down
that defense that we have to thinking
that
you know we're the good guys or
and the other people are the bad guys
and eventually we're going to have to
come to terms with the fact that
we're we did this we
created this imbalance we have benefited
from it
we are continuing to generate it in the
cars we drive and the
lives we live and the lifestyles we
aspire to
we have done this we will we have done
it
there's going to come a time eventually
where there's no place else to look but
we
have to take individual and collective
responsibility for the pain
that is that is alive within us and
lives of everyone around us
that really is a pivot point
i think when we just stop blaming the
other
stop blaming previous generations stop
so on and so forth we really settle in
we're not there yet some of us are
there yet i mean i think the psychedelic
community understands these things
because that's how you make progress in
psychedelic work
is you confront the shadow now
when you go into the work you know that
uh
the more you purify the more you cleanse
the deeper the reward the deeper the
ecstasy
the deeper the teaching so the more you
purify the deeper the communion
once you learn that not only do you
become more comfortable facing the
shadow
but you actually actively embrace the
shadow you
active actively embrace pain and
suffering
not because you like pain and suffering
but
for two reasons one is because you've
learned
that the deeper the purification the
deeper the ecstasy
and you don't like to suffer but you
like what's on the other side of the
suffering
but the second thing is you embrace the
pain and suffering
even knowing that a lot of it is not
yours
out of the same compassion that every
father has for
his children every mother has for her
children
and every teacher has for all of their
eventually that everybody has for other
people
and you embrace the pain not counting
whether it's yours or somebody else's
but because by doing so you are helping
somebody you are helping
other beings that you may never meet
and my experiences has been that if you
do that
if you are willing to take on more than
your fair share
of suffering you reap more than your
share of benefit
you the universe responds it can't
help but respond and i think that's
going to be happening with us
generationally
this generation the next generation the
generation after that is going to go
through suffering
more than their share of suffering
compared to previous generations
and after they stop kicking and
screaming and begin to get down to
taking it on and
just doing it i think they will
experience
the blessings that come from that deep
generosity that that
profound existential
choice to work with the given even when
the given is terrible
even when it kind of crushes your
personal life
but you still dedicate yourself to the
good of the whole
and in that process something begins to
change
something shifts inside your person
and the more complete the surrender to
the process the more complete the
commitment to that process
i think the deeper and the faster the
transformation
is in our individual lives and our
collective lives
so that as we move deeper into this and
come through it
i think generationally we will learn
what every psychedelic journeyer
learns that we confront the shadow
there is riches on the other side of
this
ordeal uh and there's no other way to
get to it
uh and in the end the irony is you kind
of end up where you were in the
beginning
except you're all cleaned out you're
just all sorts of this gunk
is out of your system so you are you
and you are where you were before but
you
literally are living a different life
because
stuff that you hadn't realized was
compromising you and burdening you
is no longer there and something new has
taken its place
i think that's where we're going to be
going it's going to take time
there's a lot that has kind of come up
there for me as you were talking
around like the
the complexity of the situation
and how each different
person and demographic is coming at this
differently
you know and then the confusion of what
is good or what is not
you know and then the kind of getting
into
you know like oh yes i'm gonna put
myself in the pain of this
you know does that look like being
around people like does that mean
getting involved in places where
you know i'm i'm interacting with toxic
people you know there's
there's all these weird sort of
complications and as i'm listening
i'm i'm i'm efforting to hear it from a
larger perspective
than what's happening right
now you know because if i think about
generations that suffer
i'd say that right now my
demographic even my local community you
know is not suffering nearly as much
as people in the hardest hit areas of
the united states with kovid
and not nearly as much as people who are
in poverty or who are you know
are oppressed by systemic
racism or sexism or whatever it is you
know
especially of course systemic racism is
a huge and important issue and very
like strong right now issues of police
violence
and all the rest um yeah but even then
it's like is
is that i'm just like trying to
trying to break out of the thinking that
wants to immediately point to small
examples that don't
fit into the larger generational
narrative and i'm wondering if there's
if there's something there that you want
to comment on about
about how the what you just said applies
to
the acute as much as the bigger picture
yeah you're certainly right i mean in my
local community uh we're not suffering
not badly and i'm retired and i'm the
i've been lost my job
i don't i know where my next meal is
coming from and a lot of people that's
not true
and then if we just expand the horizon
the the hundreds of thousands of people
who are uh
migrants who are ecological migrants who
are fleeing disastrous
uh circumstances people whose whole
lives fit inside a bag
a suitcase that they're carrying they're
everything they value in the world i
mean it's just
the upheaval we don't have to go very
far to find it but
even if it is far from our local
community
i i live in a strange world in that way
i mean we all watch television
we all try to keep abreast of the larger
patterns that are out there
but inwardly because of the psychedelic
work
because i've been dissolved so many
times over so many years
into the collective
breadth of humanity and because i've
been drawn into the collective
shadow work the dark night of the
collective soul work
and have gone far beyond
the collective psyche outside as
outside of the collective unconscious
into
larger patterns of time deep time
evolutionary time which you might think
of as geologic time
my insides are tuned a little
differently
because i at a sort of on a smaller
scale
when i see human beings i don't see
human beings the way other people tend
to see human beings i see souls
i relate to human beings as incarnations
of souls
and so i'm always tuning to the soul
quality
of a person and in that respect for
example we can see
young people who are truly old in their
heart and mind and we can see old people
who are like children
in their hearts and minds and everything
in between
so when i think of the people
and what we're seeing on the streets and
the and the people riding around and
pick up trucks with
carrying weapons and uh
i'm seeing souls that are in a long
they're in one phase of a long
evolutionary journey
at the soul's progression and i have a
sense of
some approximate sense of the the large
scale of the self-education
self-maturational process and some of
the stage points along that's
that scale and i don't bring that as a
model that allows me to judge people and
rank people and classify people
but i approach people
i approach people knowing that their
entire current incarnation
is just a short phase of their larger
learning process
and so
i understand the challenges that they're
facing
within this larger context within this
larger matrix
um the tricky part is you can get so
absorbed into large
perspectives like that that you can lose
the immediate
immediate suffering you can lose sight
of what it actually feels like to be
undergoing the privations right here
right now of many people
so you have to live in both morals at
the same time
with the at hand and the large scale
my professional work and my psychedelic
work has focused me on the large scale
yeah um chris i unexpectedly really have
to pee
i'm just going to take a take a little
me and i'll be right back
again okay
okay wow okay so free all of a sudden
much better yeah so
there's a lot of inner conflict that's
coming up for me as a as i'm listening
to you
um that part of me
is like yes and another part of me
is like
does this like it's the smaller wind
it's a smaller frame of like
but does saying it this way does that
does that equate to passivity
does that equate to you know like you
know if this is all part of a larger
process
is me just looking at myself you know
like
is that actually doing anything i know
if i look at the large picture yes of
course
it's doing something you know i'm
whatever helping to
evolve and churn my soul and by doing
good as best i can i help sort of bring
goodness into reality more and then it
can be sort of like
in engaged in other people's realities
or whatever else so on the on the one
level i'm like yes but on another level
like is that really enough
there's a lot of sort of psychedelic
rhetoric around like if we just gave
more people psilocybin then we'd stop
burning down the rain forest
you know if we or say ayahuasca then we
stop burning down rainforests we give
people enough psilocybin you know then
we'll we won't vote in
um uh authoritarian
leaders right yeah but i think that that
that type of thinking on some level
feels really
it feels really foolish you know to
think that if
i just do the work that's going to make
big changes in the world but that's
going to properly address things
and yet there's this whole other layer
which is like
but can i can i really do any good as a
part of a social movement
if i'm showing up with hatred in my
heart and anger and just
and projection and just looking for
someone to blame for my suffering
you know and some people are showing up
because of that
some not all obviously i don't think the
movements are inspired by this i think
they're inspired by
a very appropriate response to injustice
um
yeah and then a whole other layer of me
is like oh if i say this wrong will it
be canceled
um because of that sort of like you know
blamey hatefulness in the heart so again
these aren't clear questions i almost
like i feel like i'm just like bearing
my soul to you crystal like help me
understand
yeah like what is your perspective i
understand i really
do because if your spirituality if your
genuine spirituality
leads you uh away from social engagement
in the world
then i don't think it's a very mature
spirituality because
mature spirituality leads to that place
in the heart where we contact
the heart of all living things and when
we contact the heart of all living
things
naturally we want to help all living
and so the natural progression of
deep spiritual work when it succeeds
is to be socially engaged
in some form or another whatever we feel
particularly called to some people are
called to
medicine they're going to do it in
medicine some people are
doing it with high-tech online
international discussions some people
they're doing it in all sorts of
different ways but the important thing
is that
we find what it is that feels like our
niche our particular contribution to
make
and we do it and you're right if we do
it
when we do it we'll probably end up
finding that maybe we aren't as clean as
we thought we were
going in okay so we step back we clean
we work that part but
yeah i understand the tension it it i
would feel it more
if i were a young man like you uh
i'm older and i'm in my 70s so in some
ways i've
had i've made my decisions around those
things i've made my choices
and mostly i'm past
that active time except as a teacher
you know i write i teach i talk i do
what i can
but other people my age
they're out there on the front lines
they're much more active on the front
lines they
really are plowing those fields they're
really
they are getting the vote out they are
working very tangibly and practically to
bring about a better world
[Applause]
no standardized rules for the engagement
but we can feel when we there's a
feeling
in our center when we are aligned
with our place in the world and our
place in the movement
we've got a balance point between inner
and outer
uh sheltered and and exposed
and so we're self-correcting that we're
self-correcting beings
uh and what's most important i think is
not rules of
inner outer or how to engage and how
what what not what not
but uh tuning into that point in our
center which is our connecting point
to the larger intelligence which is
always trying to draw us towards deeper
and deeper levels of engagement with
itself and that means with the fabric of
humanity
and or non-human life forms as you say
that are also being
affected a million species going extinct
you know as we stand here as we sit here
uh yeah
i've been i've been sitting with the you
know we're
we were going to open up your book and
maybe at some point we will
um i have been sitting with the first
thing i wanted to open the book to
the first the first part of the book
that received a red tab
which was particularly important for
quoting or reference
as i have coordinated the color coding
here
and wondering how much it applies um
in the sort of like the the comparing
between a a deep psychedelic work
or a deep psychedelic journey and the
journey that we're on
right now as a as an entire planetary
organism
facing the the increasing layers of
collapse and catastrophe um in crisis
that is just funneling more and more out
of the year of clear vision
and the the part is about one of the
greatest risks
of psychedelic work as you have put in
the book being
ego inflation and i'm curious
looking around at the world that both
people in the psychedelic community so
maybe it's a real
micro scale of like this is happening in
sci culture
you know and then the larger scale of
like this is what's
this is what i'm seeing play out in the
in the big characters
like the big characters like the the
representations in the media
and so on and so forth yeah i'm just
curious about your comments on that
well you know i'm essentially a hermit
and even though i'm a member of the
psychedelic community because i'm
involved in psychedelics and thinking
about them and
i don't really have a lot of living
contact with the psychedelic community
i you know you go to conferences you
know you used to go to conferences right
you have workshops here and there you
teach here and there
but the actual number of people from
this large community is relatively
small and you you get impressions from
the books but
again since i'm older i'm not keeping
track
with all the latest articles i really
will just pay attention
more to the important books that come
out not the small stuff
uh and so i i don't know really what's
happening
in the psychedelic community uh so i
can't generalize
about that i think that
in some ways we're moving into a
psychedelic period of history
and it may be starting at low-dose
psychedelic
history but we're going to be moving
into high-dose
psychedelic history when there will
in in lodo's work you may engage
voluntarily
you know the ego dissolution process in
high-dose
work you will be engaged whether you
volunteer or not
you will be go put through the meat
grinder and
i think we're coming into a period of
history where right now we may choose
how to engage or how to pick
the pain particular pain that we're
going to take on
it's going to come a time it's going to
be the troll those choices are going to
be made for us we're going to be
surrounded by catastrophic consequences
of the historical policies that we set
in motion for
decades and hundreds of years so
it it's going to be it's truly like a
hurricane coming off shore i mean this
is like
everybody's going to be affected
everybody's going to be touched it's not
going to be a pick and choose situation
so i think that
the great danger of psychic uh work is
of
psychedelic work is psychic inflation
that is
we think we have we've had a deep
experience we think we've become a deep
person
we've had a great experience we think
we've become a we are a
great being and that of course is a
fool's delusion
whether the psychedelic community is in
that position i don't know
because i think you know if you do have
that attitude
then your own psychedelic sessions are
going to knock your feet out from under
you
harder it's going to take you down so
you learn pretty quickly that that's a
that's a dead-end street to go
and it becomes much much more basic than
that
and it's not about having extraordinary
experiences
to me it's not about i mean it's not
about having
ecstatic experiences or having
to me it's about doing whatever is
necessary
so that 48 hours after your session is
over
you're living a better life than you did
beforehand
so you're either you spend your
psychedelic session
either taking a vacation to italy
or you spend it carrying out the garbage
carrying out the garbage
is what's going to give you a better
life two days after your session is over
and if you carry out the garbage well
then you're going to see some
extraordinary things on the other side
so for me the real work is
carrying out the garbage that's i mean
and and so
why would you ever want to become more
conscious
than we already are if the consequence
of being more cost
conscious is to take more responsibility
for the garbage that
you are part of that's in your system
and it's immediately around you so when
you become more conscious
you're going to have to do more cleaning
so for some i know that other people
don't necessarily feel that way for them
psychedelics are a way to
you know access joy you know you access
great joy
great thanks but uh
when you come by those great joyful
experiences of communion or great
cosmic insights that flow into you when
you come by them
through hard work then it i don't think
it then tends to lead to psychic
inflation
so much because you know the price
you've paid
to receive these blessings you you
understand the deeper process and
that the intelligence that gave you the
blessings
is teaching you is you know taking you
along step by step
and and so you these blessings are not
given out
lightly but they're given out
intentionally
and if you're if your psychedelic work
is
is really disciplined and it's really
part of a spiritual practice for you
then everything that you're given
is also laying the foundation for work
that you're going to do
and gifts you will be given later
because the your entire relationship
with the universe
is one of the maturational development
and once you kind of feel the rhythm of
this maturational development
over the course of years in your work
then that just puts aside
it draws to a close all this sort of
psychic inflation bullshit because
it you know that that's just ego
dancing and ego
is the obstacle
the the question that's kind of like
i mean we we've kind of done this
interesting sort of like dance
and quasi pivot you know from these like
big sort of
global crises acute issues that we're in
right now and then
sort of like sort of like a larger
cosmological perspective of the
transformation of the human soul
over millennia ultimately and that
possibly we're in the
we're in the beginning of this great
painful suffering churning that will
eventually
polish us up on the other side um to
becoming what in the book you call the
the future human and now we're sort of
like back into that
kind of like we've pivoted into like
direct psychedelic work
and i don't know if this question feels
i don't i don't know if this question is
is sort of almost um
like trite in a way because it's it's so
general
or what but
i'm just holding it and it feels like i
gotta ask it which is
given where we are given what's
happening and maybe you've already said
this
uh you've already answered this somehow
but given where we are
from the perspective of the deep
psychedelic work that you've done
you know what does it mean to be a good
person
right now what is it what does it mean
to be um
what does it take you know
yeah man
that's a large question
i think of a half dozen ways to answer
that question pop into my mind
and all of them are wrong so i'm kind of
sifting through
[Applause]
layers
in some of my deepest experiences there
are
moments there are times when
and even after a session but under the
influence of the learning of a session
when
something just falls away
something opens
and i i experience the world
truly as living and breathing as
one i feel like my feet are rooted in
the earth the way a tree is rooted in
the earth i look down at the grass and i
feel
complete continuity of being between
everything around me and my own being
i feel it's breathing the same air i
feel us
all different species sharing the same
moment in time
i feel the pulse of the universe
in its utter simplicity not paying
attention to
any of our divisions of species or moods
or
incarnations or anything like that the
entire universe
just being itself
and i am part of that
in grateful it's not even communion
because communion implies a subtle
duality and this
is when all that falls away
and a great transparency of being
opens from within that position
i experience an opening of my mind
kind of a delicious
sense of presence it gives me an
intimacy with grass
and then at a deeper level i experience
an opening of my heart
in which
the idea of harming anyone is the
farthest thing from my mind
and the idea of helping everyone
is the most natural thing in the world
it's not
being good it just
it's
it's being alive within this reality of
oneness
so to me goodness
is simply an approximation are it's a
it's a
it's a compass needle that points in the
direction
of this fundamental truth
of oneness and the truth of oneness is
all these derivatives
that flow from it circumstances
but at essence it's very very simple
and i think compassion goodness in that
way
fairness justice where all aspects
of oneness are all kind of fractal
manifestations of oneness
so what does it take to be
a good person today i think it takes
a willingness a commitment to serving a
collective good
to serving a good that's not private
that opens up
to future generations that opens up to
people
who are unlike me and species who are
unlike me just an honest confrontation
with what is in order to bring about
a better life for other beings
i know this is very simple
um but to me goodness is
is is simple it is is that simple
it gets complicated in the enacting of
it but in the
at its core it
it's an action that comes out of oneness
and if it's not coming out of a deep
grounding in oneness then
maybe there's something not to trust in
it because deep goodness comes out of
oneness i think
now i don't know if this really
addresses the depth out of which your
question is coming because i i
understand
the true
the true angst not angst but the true
kind of
quandary from which that question
comes but the deepest answer i have in
response to it i'm afraid is just a
mystical experience
a mystical experience of oneness in
which that context
goodness just becomes an insignificant
component a spontaneous component
just like the way you react when you see
something beautiful
it's just it's an arising it comes up
inside of you
goodness is simply an arising that comes
up inside of you
when you're in the condition of oneness
i have a i have a maybe a more sort of
serious response and i have a more
joking response and the more serious
response is is something along the lines
of um
[Music]
like what what does it
what does it look like to um
what does the dance look like you said
it becomes difficult in the enactment
you know what does the dance look like
between
okay having that experience because i've
had that experience and i can tell you
fully 100 honestly that
anywhere from
10 of the time to 99 of the time i'm not
there at all
there's no sense of it whatsoever in my
experience you know and i i
am and i'm not in the ground of that
as i'm as i'm as i'm showing up in the
world and i'm wondering
yeah you know in the same way that
also the playful response was so we all
should all take 500 mics of lsd right
[Laughter]
no no in the what does it look like
to have had that experience because the
way that you speak about it and i think
naturally it makes sense like when
you're there
goodness just flows from you right it is
the most
organic and natural expression of being
in the world is when you're coming from
that place
and yet having a deep and profound
experience doesn't make you a deep and
profound person
experiencing oneness doesn't mean that
you now walk through the world
inspired and infused in all your actions
you know oneness just streams from your
fingertips and every interaction is a
blessing with the world
from the depth of the oneness that i
have embodied simply by taking enough
mushrooms to touch it once
so yeah what does it look like then i
mean maybe this is a question around
integration you know
what does it mean to remember that
and what does it mean to um to catch
ourselves in forgetting yeah
ah that's that is uh you know we
we go up on the mountain we see some
things we may be given some blessings
and then we come down
and then we have to go to work on monday
morning and
that's over and over again it means a
matter of constantly
uh engaging being aware of how you're
engaging
checking yourself recommitting yourself
to doing a better job
over and over and over again for me much
of it was
in my work as a teacher you know
constantly
always enjoying it always loving to be
with the students
always wanting to do it better but
constantly catching myself
making assumptions making false
inferences
not doing a good enough job being a
little tired
letting my students down on a particular
day
coming back and trying to do better
coming to better
the next day better the next week better
the next semester
over and over again trying to live
up to the things that we know to be true
integration is a
is a strange term i'm not sure i'm glad
that the psychedelic community is paying
more attention to integration because
it's
really really critical but
and there are dimensions and aspects of
integration
and the word integrate
carries us to certain distances and
doesn't carry us so far but
it's it's hard to live our visions
it's hard to live the truth of what
we've seen it because it commits you to
constantly being aware if you take the
time to remember to pay attention to
yourself
how bad a job we're doing at living
those truths
but that's just that's the nature of the
beast though
uh we just it's constantly i mean
if we are if we live around people
who are really good people who really
have a deeper natural
instinct for goodness and kindness and
generosity
than we have then it makes it easier
just
to sort of face our own
shortcomings because we have someone
that we can look at and say ah
that person is doing this better than i
do so this gives me a measuring stick i
can do better
i'll i'll do it better tomorrow i'll
keep working on it
and that's why you know in the buddhist
tradition
spiritual friends people who are also
have committed themselves to awakening
that's really one of the great
sangha community is one of the great
pillars
of progress so
yeah you're right uh it's wonderful to
have the experience but we don't walk
around in that state
but we practice and practice and
practice and then maybe 10 years later
we were in a little bit more
10 years later maybe we're in it a
little bit more
but uh practice and practice and
practice
and if we ever think that we're really
there then we always do is ask our young
children
and they'll remind us that we're not
really there as far along as we think we
are
our our kids will set us straight
or perhaps or perhaps we could i think
it was uh baba ramdas said if you ever
think you're spiritually awakened go
spend a week at your parents
uh or something like that so maybe it's
the other way around
um yes yes uh as you were speaking i
it was funny because a question started
forming and then you had said something
that i was like oh great i can point to
exactly that to ask this question which
is around
you know being around people spiritual
friends
right the question is
partly goes back to what you said around
like if your spiritual practice means
running away from the like not engaging
in the world then it's probably not a
very mature spiritual practice and i
i agree and respect that very much um
and then so there's a balance between
you know like being in these
spiritual having spiritual friends and
so on and so forth
but then not isolating oneself and only
that experience but also engaging in
being in the world
right or being right in the world not of
the world pardon pardon the reference
but then right now
it feels as though and i think in many
ways this is because
so much of our social interaction is
mediated by
screens and the influence of social
media technology
as well as the influence that in one way
or another
every interaction we have is also
informed by
is that person a loaded covid gun or
whatever it is it's it's
it's inspired by this sort of weird
things we have this
situation where we're not coming
together right
and so there's a lot of toxic
interaction there's a lot of
um charged emotional charge a lot of
embodied emotional energy that's very
tense
you know there's a lot of being exposed
to how shit the world actually is right
now there's a lot of beauty in the world
of course but
that's not what we're having shoved down
our uh uh
down our throats or shoved through our
eyes
and so so the actual interactions with
the world be they screen mediated or not
is now in this landscape of a lot of
people
understandably so very contorted by the
situation very contorted by the context
and it's in that you know in that
contortion that we generally aren't
operating from oneness right so say for
isolating ourselves and only our little
friend
group that everyone's spiritual and with
the oneness and yada yada which
ultimately
is serving those people there but only
to a certain extent and not anybody else
and then being sort of in the world
trying to be a
person of goodness and oneness but
encountering a lot of
toxicity and close-mindedness and
shunning
and um and cancel and all the rest like
how does a person walk this what does
that walk look like
good question isn't it good question
it's going to look different for you
than it will for me and it'll look
different for different people in
different circumstances
uh
i mean i've really
years ago decades ago
my life was as real as my students and
so
wherever i was on the weekends however
deep i was on the weekends whatever
spiritual practice
i was doing at six o'clock on monday
morning at 10 o'clock i was with my
class
and i was teaching in an open enrollment
university people who were first
generation college educated
in a burned out steel town where
opportunities were few and far between
and
this was front line education in america
and you
you it was hard work and we worked hard
together
so i had to be on my game engaging the
world
in my role as educator constantly
confronting their assumptions
encountering the engaging the
the biases that they would bring to the
discussions of the topics that
as a professor of religious studies i
was teaching
and so you know
i would laugh at my friends tease my
friends who were teaching graduate
courses maybe
three graduate courses a year at their
institutions where i was teaching
nine quarter courses an academic year
and then
courses during the summer it's a really
different kind of world
so if i were answering your question
15 years ago when that was my life
the hermit quality of my life would be
balanced by
my particular slice of the pie that i
was responsible for
which is helping these young people come
to deepen an understanding of the world
and of themselves in the disciplines
that i was teaching
now i'm in a different time of my life
now i am
out of that world now i am retired from
that world
uh and so
and i buffer myself from a lot of screen
time
i really don't engage i mean i i
really like you say it is so toxic
it is so confused uh
i don't think it helps me to immerse
myself
in that toxic confusion
it doesn't help me maintain the clarity
that it's my responsibility to maintain
in my life so that when i do engage
people i can be useful to people
coming out of the space that i've that i
am most comfortable with or not most
comfortable but i
most appreciate
so i don't have to engage people
nearly as much as you do and not
nearly as much of people who are going
to work nine to five they're front line
on the covet scene and they're riding a
bus they're riding a train and they're
having to make all these decisions about
who and what and what can i say and
where should i sit
and how do i breathe and all those
things
um
but the principle is always the same
i mean theresa mother teresa
[Music]
she worked with the poorest of the poor
she started her work by basically
dragging people off the streets of
calcutta so that they could die with
dignity
in some small place we engage the world
as we are as it is as
circumstances are right now the
circumstances
is this pandemic that we are involved in
and the political polarization that's
being generated by that
pandemic people are grabbing that world
from so many different places
so many places that um
generalities are hard to come by except
i come back again to that sense of inner
integrity that kind of tells us
when we are on and off course with
ourselves whether we are aligned with
our
with our deep being or whether we're out
of kilter
with our deep being um
and even in my isolation i have the
feeling of whether i am
aligned with my deep being or whether i
am not aligned with it
in terms of am i living myself my life
in a way that will put me in the
position to be of maximum benefit
when i give this talk in two weeks or
something like that that it's not
something that happens
on the day of presentation it's a whole
it's
with your life it's in is in tuned with
your deepest aspirations and your
deepest truths of what you know and
believe
so that when you are called upon
you truly have something to give
which is yours to give and that
that that tuning into that center place
takes place whether you're in the subway
or whether you're at home by yourself
it's just harder in the subway yeah
i think um i think uh
one of the things that's coming up for
me is is something along the lines of
um
what that looks like for different
people
and what that looks like for different
looks like to me
from where i'm coming from based on
where they're coming from
because there are people in this world
who
feel like they are doing exactly that
and um
what they're doing is putting you know
taking their guns out for walks and and
uh
screaming at people for wearing masks
right
or they feel like they're doing that
thing
but what they're actually doing is
propagating
neo-nazi white supremacy or what they're
actually they think that they're doing
that thing
but what they're actually doing is
something
emotionally violent immature and toxic
which is
canceling and anybody who disagrees with
them and
feeling reinforced in the righteousness
of their beliefs
by other people on the internet agreeing
with them and them all bonding by
bullying this person who
has a different opinion from them right
and that they
feel like they're doing the good thing
too and so um
i want to be able to say that i know
that me not doing those things is me
doing the good thing
and that my inclination is to think that
what they're doing is not the good
thing but then am i
am i invisibly making myself a fool
to think that i understand what goodness
is and that my goodness is
more good than their good you know is
there
is is i mean there's that question and
then there's a larger question of like
is it
all good you know is actually them doing
that good
because goodness exists larger than the
frame of reference of what my
of what our immediate sort of like acute
socio-political even lifespan time frame
seems to state is good because we're
incapable of recognizing
let alone the second and third order
consequences of our of our decisions
but the 50th 60th the the seven
generations consequence of our thinking
you know is all of this good and if all
of this is good then what does it matter
what i do
once again you're pushing into deep
territory you know in the
in the highest level of buddhist
teachings in tibetan buddhist teachings
exaction they would basically radically
qualify
goodness or the good that you know it's
like doesn't make any difference whether
you're
doing good or not doing good if you're
truly aligned with the absolute essence
of all things
it puts you in a different kind of
category
in relative to good and not good but
until you are living into that in that
absolute condition
best to do good you know because that's
the closest approximation we have to
that absolute condition and i think one
of the things that
so i'm not willing though it is from
that perspective one could relatively
profoundly relativize good and i
understand
that my own personal orientations
doesn't go in that direction to say it's
all good i mean i i understand that
it could be that we all think we're
doing good but i'm not willing to say
that all that we
are doing is all good and
one of the things is injuring other
people
injuring other people physically
psychologically
that to me is a is a marker of not good
uh that's one of the places where you
draw the line
uh because oneness is all embracing and
and it and the first rule that comes out
of that is
non-injury i think the
people who are doing the things that you
describe
they have been doing it for a long time
but right now they're doing it more
publicly than they were doing it before
before it may have been more private and
surreptitious and individual but now
they've been given permission in this
greater social reinforcement and
platforms on social media that reinforce
an echo chamber and whatnot whatnot
that reinforce those patterns
the fact that people are self-selecting
and reinforcing different patterns and
all of that's taking place
doesn't mean that um there aren't still
choices of good of for goodness to be
made
and it doesn't mean that goodness is
eliminated as
a reasonable and rational and
spiritually rich
criterion for which to look at our
behavior and ourselves doing various
things um
[Music]
lynching even though it may be believed
as being good
is not good it's a it is a not good
and a lot of people who did it believed
that they were doing good
when we wake up when we begin to wake up
through which at whatever means when we
are
touched by a passage from scripture or
whether we're touched in an ark in an
ayahuasca session in whatever form when
we wake up
constantly over and over again genuine
waking up
produces gentler people
it produces kinder people more
compassionate people
it doesn't improve it doesn't produce
homophobic people
it doesn't it produce people who are
violence and inflicting violence on
other people
it always produces gentler more
respectful people
now that doesn't mean that
doesn't mean that we necessarily don't
fight for justice and we don't confront
injustice as with what force we need to
but the core balance is
towards an equality of that that has a
gentle component to it a compassionate
component
so then the question becomes how do you
confront
the not good knowing all the things we
know about how people believe that they
are doing good how do we confront the
not good
in a way which doesn't perpetuate
evil or doesn't encourage more divisions
in the world
that's obviously a very very difficult
question
and only can be done piece by piece by
the person in circumstances in specific
circumstances
if i step back and try to generalize
then i'm just
i'm just blowing smoke you know this can
only be done from really people who are
living in the circumstances and making
decision
whether to go to the protest whether to
counter protest
how to address violence when it meets
you on the street
so on and so forth
do you think that
the what feels like the
the the almost ubiquitous rise
of of what is often called bad faith
arguments
and the almost total um
devolution destruction of
discourse as a consequence of
basically all conflict being received of
and responded to as
a form of abuse
how
i'm not sure what the question is here
um
what is the question here
what role do you see
um what role do you see
conversation open discourse
between the various expressions of
self-perceived good um as playing
in the the evolutionary process we're in
as
as humans and
and how do you balance that with
the the understandable limitation
of well i'm not really particularly
interested in giving a voice or a space
for a hateful
racist or a hateful
whatever and a violent person to have a
voice
i don't want to speak to them i don't
think that they should have something to
say
what is what is the balance there
in the course of doing good
and trying to bring about goodness in
this world
that is a a large
question again a huge question of which
i have a very
limited framework from within to respond
to it
um partly here's my background
is i'm an academic and i'm an academic
in the history of religious thought
in the history of philosophical thought
in a discipline that that prizes
engagement it prizes discussion
it prizes collaboration and conflict as
a vehicle for determining greater truth
i've gone through multiple revolutions
in my own thinking the hardest pivot
in when you move from a world view with
certain sets of
assumptions in a certain way of seeing
the world the hardest pivot
is the first one because that's when you
let go
of a sense of being grounded in reality
and you have to step back and when you
pivot in certain fundamental
beliefs then you suddenly realize that
what you had taken
as reality was just a model of reality
and you're dealing with models and
models
when the second and third and fourth
time you make that pivot as you continue
to shift and grow
it does get easier because you realize
you know you discover that you're living
within a matrix
of assumptions a paradigm of assumptions
so i've gone through being
a conventional christian to being a
non-christian
to being deeply informed by science and
the scientific worldview
to challenging some of the core axioms
of a reductive
materialist interpretation of science
through the psychedelic work
and i've been in dialogue with people
all the years
all these stages not only my students
but all the faculties and colleagues
and people who i've spent my entire
academic career disagreeing with
and still managing to be friends with
and
working with students and allowing them
to voice
opinions in the room which i find
abhorrent
and yet it's essential for them to be
able to
express themselves if there's ever going
to be a chance
of opening up a possibility that they
can
see the world from a little different
perspective
but all of that is within a certain
frame of reference
in which there is a set of rules about
the give and take
and the limits of give and take
what's happening today is a very
different world
in this sheltered world that i've been
functioning in inside a university
this is as you say it's a dissolution of
standards
it is a radicalization of everyone's got
the right to their own position and
every position
is as valuable as any other and
in the end it comes down to might makes
right
or the the vote of the majority however
coerced and contrived that is
it's a very different world and
when i try to fathom that world
i think we are living in a time i mean
we we know it
we're in a time of paradigm change we
are in a time when
certainties are becoming uncertainties
constants
are dissolving so many reference points
that people have used
to orient themselves are being changed i
mean
science changed so much and now science
has changed itself so much when it began
to point to
96 of reality is invisible dark matter
and dark energy how the hell do we live
in a universe like that
how do we live in a universe as big as
the universe as
we're describing
all the religions of the world have all
come together in one
valley it's like rivers have come
together into one valley and just
meeting each other as we have in the
last two centuries
has forced for anyone who's paying
attention
has forced a radical reassessment of all
of our truth claims
of all of the certainties that we've had
about
what we know to be true and what we know
god is doing with the world and and when
we look when
just in this complexity of plurality
that we're dealing with just within
my set of disciplines it opens up
it taps into this deep deep uncertainty
that well maybe we really don't know
what god wants and maybe we really don't
know what the truth is and maybe we
really have to go look
not only in our sacred scriptures but in
their sacred scriptures and in their
sacred scriptures to even begin to deal
with some type of
approximation that might become more
adequate than it was before
and so many of these things are missing
right now
this thought of self-awareness of the
limitations of one's paradigm
of our cultural embeddedness that's
missing
from much of this discussion so but we
see it all in acting out
we're at a time of a falling apart of
values
we can't even count on nature to be
whole the patterns that it had held for
us for all these centuries
the weather patterns are different the
rain patterns are different the heat
patterns are different
not even nature is allowing us to stay
in the comfortable domain
immigration patterns are different
racial balances in our country
are different so many differences so
many things people are scared people are
unstable people are grabbing they're
hiring to hold on to
and from one perspective you can say yes
yes
yes good luck with that because
it's going to keep falling apart it's
going to keep getting worse
and if you're not able to deal with that
you're going to
suffer enormously if you keep trying to
hold on to old values
you're going to suffer terribly and
you're going to
cause suffering and that suffering is
going to come back on you
uh to me
it's not just that the world is a dirty
and uglier place and the academic
university is
uh because the academic university can
be a pretty dirty and ugly place in its
own form in its own
genre but underneath our culture
the constants are falling away the the
the legs are being kicked out from under
the table this
just tremendous uncertainty
and truth has been a casualty of that
truth has been a casualty of that
process as well a sense of feeling truth
but we'll get through it
we have no other choice because this is
a truth that we live in we live in a
pluralistic society
we live in a sexually pluralistic
society we live in a
in a society of multiple truths we live
in a culture of multiple truths
we live in a world of expanding truths
of it just expanding horizons
over and over and over again it's very
uncomfortable to live
in such a fluid world
but if we're not good at it now we
better get good at it within the next
generation or two because this is not
going to change
we're not going to go back into the
tried and comfortable world of the past
we are only going forward into new and
uncertain territory
and we're going into it together we
have to kind of grow up
we have to grow up we have to stop
acting and
arguing like adolescence we have to
start acting and arguing like adults
and adults have a a time horizon
and a perspective that
you don't have when you're an adolescent
and adults can hold their temper more
and they don't cause injury
like adolescents do and so
[Music]
it's grow up or die time
we have to grow up we have to stand up
we have to measure up
to this
to the higher demands of growing truth
yeah because truth is growing truth is
expanding
we're trying to keep up with it
hard time mm-hmm yeah i mean this this
whole conversation i just
i mean i keep throwing really hard
questions at you and
incredibly i'm just or increasingly like
wow this is all so difficult i mean you
think these questions are difficult
the fact that we even are asking them
means we're in a reality that is far
more difficult than even just looking
and forming the questions right
and you're asking me questions about
things i don't really know much about
i mean ask me one about that i wrote a
book about
i know it's so funny i thought i was
going to ask you about psychedelics i'm
sitting here i feel like i'm in satsang
or something and you're just
like what does it mean to be a good
person grace how do i face the meta
crisis
yeah well we're all in this together we
are
all in together all your listeners and
all the people who are not listening
we're all in it together you know
what's wonderful about this conversation
and the conversations that you encourage
is that it pushes peaceful boundaries in
a safe and respectful way
it invites them to become more
self-reflective more self-aware
it invites them to read more books and
to learn more
and to become less reactive and more
integrated in their presence
that is a mode of it's not just the
content
that comes from these kind of
discussions which can be useful to
people
but the mode of the conversation itself
the mode
of disciplined inquiry it's you know you
you read the books you've done your
homework you know what the issues are
that we're going to talk about
but the the quality of engagement is
itself a model
for how we need to do to move forward
where we're going you know
and that's a great value well thank you
i kind of feel
like uh i i recognize that in myself in
the sense of what i'm attempting
to produce and also in
what i'm consuming i'm you know like i'm
kind of just coming out of this place
where
my response to all of this at first was
like okay my nervous system's on
overload
i'm gonna play playstation and i'm gonna
just like
do the absolute bare minimum of just
like i had a bunch of podcast things
recorded and i was just like
doing the bare minimum just trying to
get the podcast already recorded out
and then at some point increasingly i've
i'm
removing myself because i don't have the
ability to participate in
this degenerative social discussions i
previously was a part of in my community
in the same way and i'm looking to find
myself and surround myself with the type
of
um quality of conversation and topic of
conversation
and um and uh angle of addressing
the topic and the quality um because
otherwise you know
i am the five people i spend most time
with or i mean that's a
pretty strong generalization but if the
five people i'm spending most time with
is
whatever happens to be trending on
twitter and
and facebook which is like the
algorithms basically push for
like maximum attention
um maximum attention grabbing
and what tristan harris calls like a
race to the bottom of the brain stem
and it's all limbic hijacking and all
the rest and
the it's it's just like a it's just a
dynamic of outrage in one way or another
then that's the world i'm in and that's
the way i'm gonna
engage things and i see that i want the
podcast to be something different
you know it's like a delic i mean but
it's not
you know it's like it is about
psychedelics but it's more about being
someone who uses psychedelics and has a
psychedelic perspective trying to make
sense of
life in real life and i'm trying to also
surround myself with the types of
conversations and discussions and topics
that are
helping me stay in that so i can keep
being
a part of and contributing to that kind
of world because
i'm looking at this this balance
somebody i've been really listening to a
lot recently daniel
schmucktenberger talked about trying to
well it's kind of hard to really know if
i ever understand what he's saying
because he's
i feel like he's way too smart for me um
or i'm not smart enough or something you
know it's real humbling listening to
talk
listening to him talk uh something along
the lines of like
trying to find that place between you
know recognizing
what what's going wrong with the world
and all the things
going wrong and what am i actually able
to do
like what am i actually able to do yeah
rather than trying to solve what's wrong
with the world
being like okay i got a sense of it but
what am i actually able to do and
and right now it feels like this is what
i'm actually able to do
yeah i understand that and
i don't do twitter feeds i don't do
instagram
i spend very little time in social media
all together so at the cost at the risk
of
separating myself from the pulse of
where people are
where i live is not where most people
live
and one of the reasons i live in a
different place is because of
psychedelics
when i when i experience what's
happening it's within a different
historical
horizon than most people experience
what's happening and when i am concerned
for the people
who are suffering even that is from a
different perspective because of the
psychedelic experiences
that have taught me to recognize the
different levels of
being that are present in a human body
the different levels of soul inside
a human body and then to recognize even
the different levels of soul maturation
which are in a species
in an historical period and that's
contextualized
within an ex
an intimate experience of the aliveness
of the universe that the universe is
alive at
core in every blade of grass and
every every gyration of the planets
in the movement of the galaxies it is
alive and its intelligence and its
intelligence is constantly knocking on
the back of our mind
constantly asking for permission to
enter
and to infuse us more with its
understanding to
to attend that deeply to
the invitation that the universe gives
us
requires stepping out of twitter feeds
and instagram feeds and this buzz buzz
buzz
which is important
but if you want to it's like
if you want to understand where we are
in our universe and where we are in the
galaxy and where our galaxy is you have
to go out at night under a dark sky with
no surrounding lights
and and let your eyes adjust to the
darkness and stay focused there for a
long time
and then listen very carefully and it's
the same way with inner knowing
inner knowing requires a stepping back
out of the give and
take of daily discourse
tuning in deeply and
i've been blessed in that i've my life
has afforded me an unusual amount of
time
to do that without taking on monk's
robes
uh you know that's
so my whole experience of the challenges
that we're facing
all of them are really not based on
earthly wisdom
you know this i try to frame it as best
i can earthly wisdom
but my framing my deepest understanding
of what's
what are really the challenges that are
we're facing and what's really driving
the
the social context that we're in
you know they come out of my psychedelic
work they come out of a
very very different
perspective than even a time
space perspective or i would say that
the time space
perspective is at best
fifty percent at best fifty percent
and the other fifty percent or more
really comes out of a
an intimacy
i don't want to say with the divine
because that brings us back to the
culture wars
how do we define god but and so that's
why i talk about the mind of the
universe and
intimacy with the generative
intelligence
of the universe an intimacy with the
creative intelligence
of the universe that to some degree
has taken me under its wing because i
was willing to pay the dues to snuggle
up inside there
and
[Music]
you never look at life again as you know
after you've been into those intimate
places
when you've been dissolved into the into
the
deepest pulse of life that you've ever
known you
never experience life the same way again
[Music]
and if you've if you've nurtured a deep
and long
connection to
this deeper knowing which transcends
history in a profound way
you never you never experienced life the
same way
as you did before you now have a
it's not like you have the answers or
you have
the knowledge which solves things but
there is
a there's an intimacy
it makes you very sensitive to how much
fear drives things
and when you've when you've dissolved
all the fear that
you've ever been asked to dissolve when
you when you dissolve
all of that and you enter into those
territories which
uh in which there is no fear and there
is
only truth and only insight and only
understanding
and only love and compassion then when
you come back out of that and
and you look at life around you so
much of it is driven by fear and so
little understanding and
so many people are afraid of dying and
so many people are afraid of losing this
that and the other because that
underneath it
they're fundamentally afraid for their
own existence for their just
they're afraid of dying and if you lose
that if you
are no longer afraid of dying and you're
no longer afraid of that
deep restructuring whether or not you
are
challenged by short-term restructuring
or not
you come at it from a very different
perspective
you just live it from a different way so
to me you know lsd in the mind of the
universe is a psychedelic memoir
it's a whole life's work that is
reflected there
so it's a journey that's why i like the
title diamonds from heaven better
because it
it's a story of a journey of deepening
intimacy
and when you when you come out of that
you i remember
when i would do a session and at the end
of the session
someone i would pick me up at the end of
the day
and take me to where i would be that
night
and once in a while we had to go buy a
grocery store
and as you can imagine there are a few
places stranger to be than an american
grocery store
after you've come down from a serious
psychedelic session
it's like being in
disneyland i mean it's like in a strange
strange world
something as simple as a grocery store
can be
uh that's our work though isn't it
when we we go into this space we we
enter into deeper intimacy with whatever
it is that's driving the universe
and then we come back and we try to live
our lives
as best as we can this is what
reincarnation does
reincarnation plunges into it pulls us
out
connects us to spiritual reality again
plunges
us back in and then we go out again and
back and forth and back and forth a
psychedelic session will do the same
thing but on a smaller orbit
it basically kills the earthly life it
shatters the earthly life
and opens us up to what it's like to die
into this great surrounding world
and then after the session we come back
and we're alive inside time and space
again
and then a few months later we'll
shatter out into outside time and space
so we're reproducing reenacting the
dynamic
of nature in reincarnation and whatnot
once you do that enough times and once
you
incarnate enough times then you
you cease to to relate to the world the
way you did before
and in much of this
aberrant social behavior that we see
around us what i see
is so much
youth is so much an experience there's
so much
naivete maybe badness
but more than badness i see
something that makes me feel terribly
sad i see
people not knowing better and if you ask
why don't they know better
at core i'm looking at a soul and i
think why does this
soul not know better
and at core of that it's like jesus
they're babies they're children they're
adolescents
they just haven't matured enough
to really understand the deep
reciprocity that exists between human
beings which leads to a respect of human
beings no matter what they are
no matter who they are
that's well
that's childishness really
and psychedelics grow us up i mean if
you do them right if you use them
carefully
they accelerate our maturation they
don't make us perfect
they don't fill us up with you know
eternal truths
but they do force us to become
more mature than we were in the
beginning if we
if we engage them responsibly
well that might be a good place to to
call to a close i feel like that was a
really great way to end
um chris i want to thank you
for sitting down
and addressing a bunch of questions that
a couple maybe a little bit
for the most part 80 of this had nothing
to do with your book i didn't even open
it up as to what's the plan
and i really asked you to go to the edge
of your thinking i feel like i really
asked you to go to the edge of your
thinking today
um on some difficult questions and i
feel really i feel really nourished by
what came of it
and i and i trust that my listeners will
will feel the same or at the very least
something something will come up worthy
of talking about
um and so i i really appreciate your
time today chris
you bet i trust our conversations i
trust what comes out of them i trust
where they go
i hope they're useful uh to the people
who tune into your podcast it's always a
joy
uh to talk with you james thank you
chris i'm gonna show your book here for
those uh who are watching on
the youtube lsd and the mind of the
universe
um it's a very good book and i'm gonna
put a plug in for a book of a friend of
mine
because if if you are concerned about
the birth of the future human and if
you're concerned with the historical
crisis that we are entered and you want
deeper understanding
my book gives a psychedelic vision of
where we are and where we're going
but this book let's see right here is it
showing here yeah i see it choosing
earth humanity's great transition
to a mature planetary civilization yeah
doing nails and you can see it's not a
big book it's a thin book it won't take
you a lifetime to read it
really really really fine book
looking at where we are where we're
going and how to navigate the times
we're entering
very fine book cool thanks for the
suggestion chris
uh last thing is there anywhere given
how damning we were of social media
throughout the course of this interview
are there places on social media that
you'd like to
direct people towards well in a couple
of months
they can go to chrisbache.com the
website will eventually appear there
i'm so i'm so social media out of it i
don't haven't fulfilled my
responsibility to
have the website up and done they can
reach me at
my university email address which is
bash my initial c m bash at
ysu dot edu
they can contact me there for the time
being but in a couple of months they'll
be able to go to
chrispaige.com great well thank you very
much chris
and uh looking forward to the next
conversation me too james
always and cut okay thank you for tuning
in
uh check out chris's book lsd in the
mind of the universe
it's beautiful um i loved it as you can
see here
you know so many tabs so many underlines
i loved it um i also love talking with
chris
so he's a great guy he's seemingly a
great guy and he's got a lot of wisdom
and check out his book additionally if
you like this episode you can share with
a friend and if you'd like to support
the show financially patreon is a great
option where you can pledge
a monthly an amount to be sent forth
monthly
as little as a cup of coffee once a
month everything is something and it all
adds up
to allow me to earn income while
dedicating myself full-time to the show
and to the larger body of psychedelic
research that i'm putting into and out
into the world
um and i had mentioned there was a
special announcement
after the interview so i'll just let it
go now which is that i'm going to be
taking a two episode break
for the next little while so if you're
new to the show it's a great opportunity
to go back
through the archives if you're not new
to the show i will be releasing some
content
patrons i just released an update on the
patreon feed just for you
which includes um some insider
information
uh but also includes some exclusive
content that's just gonna be for you
guys as well
and uh yeah so i'm taking a two-episode
break to sort of like
clean house metaphorically not so much
literally my house is pretty good
but definitely metaphorically and
yeah so that's all thanks for tuning in
thanks for
listening all the way to the end and i
will see you on the next episode of
adventures
through the mind and until then take
[Music]
care
you